How can winters and certain places be getting colder if the planet is warming?

When a big snowstorm hits the United States, climate denialists can try to cite it as proof that climate change isn't happening. In 2015, Senator James Inhofe, an Oklahoma Republican, famously lobbed a snowball in the Senate as he denounced climate science. But these events don't actually disprove climate change.

While there have been some memorable storms in recent years, winters are actually warming across the world. In the United States, average temperatures in December, January and February have increased by about 2.5 degrees this century.

On the flip side, record cold days are becoming less common than record warm days. In the United States, record highs now outnumber record lows two-to-one. And ever-smaller areas of the country experience extremely cold winter temperatures. (The same trends are happening globally.)

So what's with the blizzards? Weather always varies, so it's no surprise that we still have severe winter storms even as average temperatures rise. However, some studies suggest that climate change may be to blame. One possibility is that rapid Arctic warming has affected atmospheric circulation, including the fast-flowing, high-altitude air that usually swirls over the North Pole (a.k.a. the Polar Vortex). Some studies suggest that these changes are bringing more frigid temperatures to lower latitudes and causing weather systems to stall, allowing storms to produce more snowfall. This may explain what we've experienced in the U.S. over the past few decades, as well as a wintertime cooling trend in Siberia, although exactly how the Arctic affects global weather remains a topic of ongoing scientific debate.

Climate change may also explain the apparent paradox behind some of the other places on Earth that haven't warmed much. For instance, a splotch of water in the North Atlantic has cooled in recent years, and scientists say they suspect that may be because ocean circulation is slowing as a result of freshwater streaming off a melting Greenland. If this circulation grinds almost to a halt, as it's done in the geologic past, it would alter weather patterns around the world.

Not all cold weather stems from some counterintuitive consequence of climate change. But it's a good reminder that Earth's climate system is complex and chaotic, so the effects of human-caused changes will play out differently in different places. That's why "global warming" is a bit of an oversimplification. Instead, some scientists have suggested that the phenomenon of human-caused climate change would more aptly be called "global weirding."

